---
layout: post
title: "Back to compiling software"
author: Ulf Lilleengen
categories: freebsd
---
For a while now, I have been using Ubuntu Linux on my desktop, and it as worked
really well. In fact, I even installed Windows 7 on my media center (replacing
Linux) just to stop bothering with configuring my system all the time. Since I
started working at Yahoo!, I did not really feel like having to do extra work at
home in order for my computer to function properly. Moreover, I did not have
much time left to work on FreeBSD, so I simply reinstalled my desktop with
Linux, and that has been working well for almost a year now.

But recently I have sort of missed working on FreeBSD, so I decided to give it
at try again from a user perspective. Many of the things I feel was lacking is
still there. However, the things that were good, are still good. So far, I have
been able to install all software that I wanted to install, but I still feel
that we need something better on top of ports in order to make it easier for
users. Hopefully, some of the initiatives that I have seen on the mailing list
will not die any time soon. Apart from ports, many of the common tasks are
pretty manual too. Configuring the system should be more straightforward than
having to guess and edit what should be in /etc/rc.conf. Though many of the
issues I encounter comes from the fact that FreeBSD has a very small userbase,
and is simply not prioritized by many companies, there are a lot of things that
can be improved irregardless of that. If i start doing any more FreeBSD work, it
is most likely to be in the "make-it-less-painful-to-use"-department.
